## 📅 2026-06-25
### 📖 Tech blog: [Behind AWS S3’s Massive Scale](https://highscalability.com/behind-aws-s3s-massive-scale/)
#### ✏️ Summation
- S3 architecture consists of 4 high-level services: REST API, namespace service, storage fleet, and storage management fleet.
- The storage backend is a simple log-structured merge tree (LSM tree) with shard data stored outside the tree to reduce write amplification.
- Since IOPS is limited, they use parallel IO.
- S3 uses Erasure Coding, which means data is split into K shards with M redundant "parity" shards. It can tolerate M failures out of the total K + M shards.
- S3 tries to spread these shards as broadly as possible. This avoids hot spots and burst demands, while also giving them more durability and no read amplification.
- S3 experiences workload decorrelation. Due to the sheer scale of the system and its multi-tenancy, most storage workloads remain completely idle for most of the time, but as the system aggregates millions of workloads, the underlying traffic to the storage flattens out remarkably.
- Parallelism improves performance for customers, and optimizes workload decorrelation for S3.
- S3 leverages parallelism through requests. PUT requests support multipart uploads, and GET requests support an HTTP header that allows clients to read only a particular range of the object.
- S3 introduced new replication logic into its persistence tier that allows them to reason about the per-object order of operations. It acts as a witness to S3 writes and a read barrier during S3 reads, providing read-after-write consistency for S3 objects.
- S3 achieves 11 nines of durability by building a continuous self-healing system with detectors that track failures and scale their repair fleet accordingly.
- S3 implemented a checksum in the SDK that's added as an HTTP Trailer to the request to prevent data from being corrupted before it reaches S3.
- S3 has integrated extensive property-based tests iterating through large sets of request patterns as well as lightweight formal verification in their CI/CD pipeline to help new engineers understand the system.

#### 💡 Reflections
- It is impressive that the sheer scale of S3 helps to flatten out the underlying traffic to the storage. Other huge tech companies like Google, Microsoft, and Facebook also likely experience similar phenomena.
- S3 treats durability as the most important factor.
- In many cases like Network, OS, and Hardware, they have to build their own solutions to achieve this level of durability and availability.
